In contrast to the probability mass
function, which assigns probabilities to
specific values for discrete random
variables is the probability
density function, which is associated
with continuous random variables.
Just like a probability mass function has
specific rules that it has to follow,
a probability density function has
specific rules that it has to follow.
Specifically, to be a valid
probability density function,
a function must satisfy being larger
than or equal to zero everywhere.
And, then the total area
under it must be one.
And, then here is the basic rule
of a probability density function.
Areas under probability density functions
correspond to probabilities for
that random variable.
So for example, if I say
intelligence quotients are normally
distributed with a mean of 100 and
a standard deviation of 15,
that implies that the population follows
a specific bell shaped looking curve.
And I am assuming that
the probability that I draw sam-,
that the probability, if I were to draw a
sample, the probability that a person from
that sample has an IQ between 100 and say,
a hundred, 115, is this area right here.
Note again, our probability density
function is a statement about
the population of intelligence
quotients in this case.
It's not a statement
about the data itself.
Again, we're going to use the data
to evaluate that assumption and
to evaluate statements about
the population probability.
But inherently whenever you
say the word probability,
you are talking about
a population quantity.
Interestingly note when we model
continuous probabilities like this,
or probabilities for continuous random
variables like this, the probability that
it takes any specific value is in fact
zero because the area of a line is zero.
This isn't a problem.
This is just a quirk from modeling
random variables as if they
have infinite precision, but it doesn't
gum up the works in any way at all.
It turns out that the bell shaped curve is
a rather difficult density to work with.
At least until you learn how, which we're
going to be doing in a separate lecture.
So let's work with a much
simpler density right now,
specifically one that looks
just like a right triangle.
So f of x equals 2x for
x between 0 and 1, and 0 otherwise.
And let's give some context around it.
Let's say it's the proportion of help
calls that get addressed in a random day
by a help line is given by this.
So what does this mean?
This means that the probability
that between 20% and
60% of the calls get addressed
that day is given by this area.
Let's ask the question,
is this a mathematically valid density?
I plotted the probability
density function right here.
It looks like a right triangle.
Notice the R code is given here,
and is given in the lecture slides
itself because the slides are created
using the slidify format.
So it's important to actually use
git to pull the course repository.
And you can actually look in the rmd,
or R markdown file, and
get all of the code for all of
the examples for all of the lectures.
So at any rate,
we need to discuss whether or
not this probability density function is
a valid probability density function.
Notice, it's always bigger than or
equal to zero.
And then secondly,
let's calculate its area.
Well, that's not too hard
because it's a right triangle.
One half the area of the base,
right, which is one half,
times the height, which is 2.
So one half times 2 is 1.
So the area is 1.
So in fact, this is a valid
probability density function.
Let's go through an example
of working with this density.
What's the probability that 75% or
fewer calls get addressed in a randomly
sampled day from this population?
Well, it turns out quite nice that this
is just another right triangle that we
need to figure out.
So the height at this point is 1.5,
because remember the function is just 2
times x, so at the point,
point se, 0.75, the height is 1.5.
And then of course,
the value of the, the base is 0.75.
But then we divide it by 2 because
it's one-half the area of the base
times the height.
And that works out to be 56%,
as shown right here.
It turns out that this density is actually
a special case of a known density,
called the beta distribution.
And I give you the R code here for
directly getting this probability
from the beta distribution.
Of course, we don't need it,
because it's just working with triangles.
However, in more complicated settings,
we're going to need these functions.
I want to add that the word,
the letter p, in front of
a function asks for probabilities.
So pbeta is going to ask for
the probability from a beta
density of being less than 0.75.
Here the 2 and the 1 are the specific
parameters that turn it into the exact
triangle that we're using right here, and
you see that you get the same number, 56%.
Certain areas of the density are so
useful we give them names.
For example, the cumulative distribution
function of a random variable x, returns
the probability that a random variable
is less than or equal to the value x.
So it returns the probability capital
X is less than or equal to little x.
And this definition applies whether
x is discrete or continuous.
So remember in our beta distribution
that we just looked at,
the pbeta function in R always returns
whatever the first argument is,
the probability of being less than or
equal to that.
So in fact whenever you
do pdensity name in R,
it is actually just returning
the cumulative distribution function.
The survival function is sometimes
interesting to work with instead of
the distribution function, and it's
just 1 minus the distribution function.
So, instead of the probability
of being less than,
it's the probability
of being greater than.
So imagine if we wanted the cumulative
distribution function of the density
considered before.
Say for example, we wanted to know
what's the probability that 40% or
fewer of the calls get
answered in a given day?
What's the probability that 50% or fewer
of the calls get answered in a given day?
And what's the probability that 60% or
fewer of the calls get
answered in a given day.
Given the particular model
that we have right now,
which is this right triangle as a
population, probability density function.
Well, for any of those numbers,
just looking at the picture,
it's going to be very similar to 0.7,
how we figured it out for 0.75.
It's going to be a right triangle, so
it's going to be one-half the area
of the base times the height.
That's always going to be one-half x,
whatever x you're plugging in, times 2x,
the height at that point,
which works out to be x squared.
So the function x squared takes the number
that you're want to evaluate and
gives the probability of
that percent of calls or
fewer getting answered on
a randomly sampled day.
Okay.
So we see that here when plug in pbeta,
which is our cumulative distribution
function in R for these three values.
The 2 and the 1 make it so that we're
evaluating the specific beta density.
And that works out to 16%, 25% and 36%.
So, on 16, so
the probability that 40% of the calls or
fewer get answered on a given day is 16%.
The probability that 50% of the calls or
fewer get answered on a given day is 25%.
And the probability that
60% of the calls or
fewer on a given day get answered is 36%.
If you wanted the survivor function,
it's 1 minus the cumulative distribution
function, so it's 1 minus x squared.
In the future we're going to have, work
with more complicated density functions,
but it'll actually be easier, because
we'll just be relying, for example, on
the pnorm and pbeta function, like this,
instead of directly figuring them out.
You've already heard of sample quantiles.
For example,
if you score into the 95th percentile,
which is the 0.95th quantile on an,
on an exam,
know that 95% of the students scored
worse than you and 5% scored better.
These are the so called sample quantiles.
We're going to define
their population analogs.
So remember in the sample quantile, if
you want to define the 95th percentile or
the 0.95 quantile,
what you would do is line
the observations from least to greatest.
And you would find the exam score or
the point,
such that 95% of
the observation lie below it.
The alphath quantile of the distribution
function with distribution function F is
the point x sub alpha such that
F of x of alpha equals alpha.
That's quite a tongue twister, so
let's see if we can draw a picture.
If we were to draw a density, F of x,
the distribution function evaluated at x,
is the area below the point x.
Which is the probability that a random
variable from this population is
less than or equal to x.
So you might think of it as
a population of test scores.
And it's a infinite
population of students.
And here, this would be
the probability of getting a score for
a randomly drawn student from
this population of x or lower.
The alphath quantile is we
move this line around until we
find the point x sub alpha, so that
exactly alpha probability lies below it.
That is exactly what we are doing with our
data when we find an empirical quantile.
We keep finding the data points such that,
for
example, 95% of the test
scores lie below it.
That would be the sample 95th percentile.
Now we move the x point along until we
find the point such the probability of
lying below it is 95% in this
population distribution.
Again, the percentile is simply
a quantile with alpha expressed as
a percent instead of a proportion.
And the median is the per,
perhaps the most well known quantile,
is the 50th percentile.
We're going to use quantiles a lot,
so it's worth reinforcing this point.
So the 95th percentile of a population
distribution is the point,
such that the probability a random
variable is drawn from that
population is less than that value is 95%.
And the probability that a random variable
drawn from that population is more is 5%.
Let's work through our previous example.
What is the median of the distribution
that we were working with before?
Remember that the distribution
looked like a right triangle.
In the distribution function,
for example if wanted to
find the probability that x proportion of
calls got answered on a given day or less,
that F of x, that distribution function,
worked out to simply be x squared.
Where x has to be a value between 0 and
1 for it to make sense.
In this case, we want to solve 0.5 equals
F of x, which is equal to x squared.
Resulting in the solution square root 0.5.
This is 0.7.
So what this means is that
on about 50% of the days,
70% of the phone calls,
or fewer get answered.
And on about 50% of the days, about 70%
of the phone calls or more get answered.
We work with quantiles a lot, especially
quantiles from the normal distribution.
We almost never go through this process
of working directly with the densities to
calculate quantiles, because the
distributions we work with are common and
this has already been done for us.
In R, there's an easy tri-,
trick.
Basically, q in front
of the function name,
function density name,
gives the quantiles.
So in this case,
we know that this is a beta density.
Well, we don't know.
I'm telling you that
this is a beta density.
And so
qbeta gives us the relevant quantile.
Here we plug in 0.5.
And remember R takes the argument
of the quantile as a proportion.
So, if you plug in 0.5, it will work.
If you plug 50 for 50%, it will not work.
Okay, and the 2 and
the 1 are the parameters that we
haven't really fully described.
But that you are going to have to
just take my word for it that those
are the parameters that yield the specific
data density that we're looking at.
And when we plug this in, we get 0.7,
0.71, exactly like we got before.
You might be wondering, at this point,
I've heard of a median before,
but it wasn't as complicated.
I just ordered my observations from least
to greatest and took the middle, or
the average of the two middle observations
if I had an even number of observations.
There you had a sample quantity.
It's an estimator.
In this class, we're going to
build up not just estimators but
the targets of estimation or the estimand.
So in this case, your sample median
is estimating your population median.
So for example,
a sample median from our previous example
is if we were to sample a couple of days,
calculate the percentage of calls that
got answered on that, of those days,.
Line up those percentages, and take
the middle one, that would be the median.
We would think of that as a target as a,
as an estimator of a population.
Sort of a true median percentage
of calls that get answered.
And there's, of course, a lot of
assumptions that we're going to need to
make to connect that
sample to the population.
However we're going to be wide
eyed about those assumptions and
we're going to formally develop them.
So at any rate, in this class, to every
estimator there will be an estimand.
The sample mean will estimate
the population mean.
The sample median will estimate
the population median.
The sample standard deviation will
estimate the population
standard deviation.
And so on.
This is the formal process
of statistical inference,
linking your sample to a population.